Welcome, everyone, and thank you so much
for joining us for our event today,
which will be focusing
on a really important topic.
We're currently in one of the busiest
shopping periods of the year,
but scammers are also busy coming up
with clever new tactics to convince us
to part with our personal
and our financial information.
UK Finance have recently published
their Fraud and Scams figures
for January to June 2023
and compared to the same period in 2022,
the number of scams report
have actually increased by 22%.
Now, one of the best tools
we have at our disposal
to protect ourselves from cyber criminals
is our ability to identify scams,
which in turn
will help us to avoid falling victim.
Now we understand that being targeted by
scammers
will impact us all in different ways.
So today, we wanted to give you
all the opportunity to tell us what's
on your mind by submitting questions
around fraud scams and cyber crime.
Through our scam, Ask the Experts event.
We're also
extremely lucky to be joined
by some industry experts
who will help to answer our questions
and will share insight into how
we can avoid falling victim
and ultimately beat the scammers.
So first of all, for myself,
my name is Paul Martin and I am part
of the Digital Eagles and Money
Mentor team here at Barclays Bank.
Our team are passionate
about helping people to enhance
their digital skills and also
to manage their money in a digital world.
I'm also looking to be joined by Ryan
Pallett from our Scam investigation team.
He'll be providing us with insight
into the latest fraud
and scam trends and how we're proactively
supporting our customers
to protect themselves
through education and awareness.
And we'll also welcome Paul Maskall
from the dedicated card on Payment
Crime Unit
who will be sharing his knowledge
and expertise on the tactic,
techniques and psychology used by today's
criminals, and how changing
your mindset can actually reduce
the risk of falling victim.
Now, before we get started
with answering your questions today,
I wanted to come over
to both of our guest speakers
to share a little bit more insight
into the work that they're doing
and why, of course, this is so important.
So first of all, if we wouldn't mind
coming over to you, Paul.
Thanks, Paul.
And yeah,
good afternoon, everybody, and welcome.
And thank you very much
for being on the session today.
So I'm a little bit different.
I tend to come at it from a very much
more of a psychology point of view
and a perspective point of view
is that very often is that fraud
and scams is often seen as as an issue
that happens to other people.
Very often it's a crime type that people
fall for in these sorts of situations.
But what we often forget in these sorts
as a kind of context is that, well,
actually everybody's been told something
that they wanted to hear
at probably the wrong time,
that you should have heard it.
That could have been your last
relationship, your last job, your last
marriage.
It could have been 101 different contexts
as to how that happened.
And the problem is,
is that very often when it comes down
to the way the world works
now, from a society point of view, is that
we are very often on our technology
a lot where either through text
messages, through social media,
through emails, through phone calls,
we're both simultaneously more connected,
but also simultaneously more isolated.
And as Paul said,
we've seen this massive rise in scams
reporting
and these kind of different elements.
And very often fraud is very often
expedited by the use of our technology.
So from my point of view,
I am one of the National Take
Five spokespeople and very often is
I can give you all of the education
in the world and I can give you
all of the top ten tips,
but unfortunately, I can't make you
any less emotional in the moment
and very often is that and
there is a flavor of fraud for everyone.
There's a flavor of scam for everyone,
no matter what your age is, who you are,
where you are, what your perspective
is, how confident or savvy
you believe you are.
And unfortunately, everybody is being told
something that they wants to hear.
So first of all, from a take
five point of view,
it is taking the three aspects
around stop, challenge and protect.
Because in any given situations,
if you having a contact, a text message
or an email like stop,
do you think that it could be a scam?
Is this legitimate?
Because if you now
think about today's world,
is there actually, in order to verify
who I am in any given situation,
I don't really need that much,
whether it's a product
or a piece of information or even if
I'm trying to impersonate somebody.
So first of all, stop it.
Take that moment.
And just like that argument you've had
with a partner or a family member,
taking that time to take a breather
to think, okay, well, hold on a second.
Am I really saying this in the right way?
Take letting that emotion
sort of cool down, but also challenge you,
challenge
the person on the other end of the phone
if they're a legitimate organization.
Very often it's about an online
being made sure that very often actually,
if they're Barclays, if they're a bank,
if they're law enforcement
or they're a telecoms company
or somebody an organization,
they're not going to have a problem with
you having that moment to say, you know
what, I think this could be a scam
or to have that piece of mind.
But very often
the third aspect is about protection.
So, again, stop, challenge and protect
that from a protect point of view.
If you do think you have been impacted
and targeted by a criminal
in these sorts of situations,
it is about contacting your bank
immediately
in order to have that rectified
or that then to assist you,
but also to contact action
fraud and report it.
So that is really the framework around
the Take five to Stop fraud campaign.
And again, is it's very often
it's about that emotional mindfulness.
And this is where it comes into, well,
how do I identify it in the first place?
How do I go about
if what is an email or a phishing text
or or something along those lines?
Well, I believe in what's called cause.
So it's very often C.A.
U. S. E.
And no matter what the flavor of fraud,
whether it is a Royal Mail scam,
whether it is a DPD parcel scam,
whether it's somebody talking to you
online or engaging with you through online
dating or any other platform,
is that generally speaking, as a criminal,
I will use a combination
of these five things,
potentially all four or five
or at least some weight on different ones.
So first of all, I'm going to use context.
So why is that
the reason I'm talking to you,
whether that be an investment opportunity,
whether that be I'm in love with you
or something along
those lines is very often the context is
really crucial for to give you a certain
element of, well, this is
this is a legitimate communication
because of this reason.
Now, very often it
then leads into elements of authority.
So hello, I'm from Barclays.
Hello, I'm from the police. Hello,
I'm from the NHS.
Hello, I'm from I don't know your telecoms
provider or something along those lines.
It's giving you that context,
but also giving you
a certain amount of trust
that I am who I say I am.
And you can trust me because I am
your organization in which you work with.
Now, very often people
turn around and say, Well,
I got contacted by a certain bank,
but I don't even bank with them.
Yes, but if I contact it, contact
150 people during that day
and only one person
actually does bank with that bank, then
that's a good return on my investment
from a criminal point of view.
So very often it's
high volume, low return,
but also urgency
in any of these given situations.
Very often I want to make you do something
very, very quickly.
So whether it's if you don't act now,
then this horrible bad thing will happen.
Or if you don't act now,
then very often it's this
you will lose out on the opportunity for.
So whether that's investments
or again, a problem with your account
or something along those lines,
generally speaking,
and a legitimate, legitimate organization
will not pressure you
in that kind of urgency on that tonality.
And again, being able
to challenge them and say, you know what,
this is not something that I'm comfortable
with and taking those payments.
But also scarcity.
Now scarcity, human beings, generally
speaking, when we look at the kind
of the high rise in in
again, the kind of
the time of year
where we're all wanting to buy Christmas
gifts, we're looking to get deals,
Black Friday is just past
the Christmas sales coming on, etc.
Very often
we are hardwired to overvalue scarcity.
So when you see a web website
saying, well, it's a limited time offer
for you to be providing this, fantastic.
Very often when it's only a few left
in stock, it provides
this kind of nudge to go,
I'll just buy that, or I'll get that.
So very often criminals would use elements
of scarce scarcity to support
that and get us to commit
or to do something in those situations.
But more importantly
than all of these things,
and again, I will use a combination
of those first four,
but generally speaking,
I will absolutely weigh upon.
The emotional aspect is that very often
I will want to make you panicked.
I want to make you depressed.
I want you to make you anxious.
I want you to make you fearful
or I want to make you excited.
I want you to make you hopeful.
I want to make you again
in any of the spectrum of generally
want to use the two ends of the spectrum,
whether that be really positive feelings
or really negative feelings.
Because you know as well as I do,
we don't think
overly objectively when we are emotional.
So in these situations I'm reliant on
especially the urgency aspect.
I want to get you to do something
within that finite emotional window,
whether it is to give me
your information in your data,
or it might be to transfer some money
through a bank, transfer for a product
or for an opportunity or an investment,
or even to help out what you believe is
somebody that's
very close to you, especially in things
like romance scams as well.
So that emotion is really, really crucial.
And very often it's more of fraud
and scams
is much more about emotional mindfulness
than many other things because I can
give you all the education in the world,
but I cannot get you
to actually consciously take that moment
and think about those emotions as well.
So stop, challenge and protect.
And I'm looking forward
to answering those questions as well.
Amazing and
thank you so much, Paul
and really insightful because we know
there is a lot of psychology
that goes into fraud and scams.
And one of the reasons why scams continue
to be such a problem is because scammers
have become really clever
at manipulating people into behaving
in a way
that they would always usually wouldn't.
So end some really good insight.
There am a great introduction to
the sessions and thank you so much, Paul.
And with that,
we're going to come over to you, Ryan,
if you wouldn't mind telling us
a little bit
more about the work
you do to help protect and educate people.
Yeah, of course.
And thank you again.
Like the other two had already said.
Thank you very much for joining us today.
So my name's Ryan and I'm
part of the fraud
and scams investigation
team here at Barclays.
So in a nutshell,
what my role ultimately is, is almost
first point of contact with customers
to ultimately try and protect themselves
from potentially falling victim to a scam
or potentially
fraud or something like that.
What we ultimately do within our role is
we will basically investigate a payment
that's been flagged on our fraud system
that it suspects is potentially fraudulent
or potentially something that is
maybe a risk
more than maybe usual payments
that you might potentially make.
This could be down
to a number of different things.
It could be sort of digital footprint
like what Paul mentioned a second ago.
It could be the fact that,
let's say for instance,
it can see that you're maybe transacting
in a different area
from what you usually do,
a different country,
something along those lines.
That would be a cause for our risk.
It could be the fact
that it's a larger amount
than what you usually potentially make.
What we ultimately need to do is
we need to come to a conclusion
as to whether the payment
is potentially genuine or not.
And if we don't feel
we have enough evidence
to be able to do that,
we simply call the customer
and try and have a conversation
around the payments.
Now, what's involved in that is obviously
a number of detail questions,
and every agent along with myself,
we are specifically trained
to pick up on what we class is red flags.
So these could be sort of certain things
where maybe you've been forced
or pressured into making the payment
exactly like Paul mentioned a minute ago,
It could be something where you've made it
in promised a certain offer
or a return or something like that.
And you've been told
that if you don't make the payment
now, you're going to miss out
on the opportunity or something like that.
It could be the fact
that maybe you are making a purchase.
It's not like we set this target
time of year, very, very prevalent
for scammers to basically pick up on
potential purchase scams or forcing people
into trying to buy a specific item
is picking up on those conversations.
And those potential may be key sentences
that are said during the conversation.
So ultimately determine whether we believe
a payment is genuine or not.
Scammers, exactly like what we said
a minute ago,
are unfortunately adapting
and evolving every single day
to basically overcome
sort of certain situations and parameters
for for us to basically have to ultimately
come to that conclusion as to
whether it is, again, fraudulent or not.
This is a bank
we speak obviously with other banks
and we sort of discuss trends and patterns
and different scenarios
that we see quite frequently.
It could be a number of different things.
Like I mentioned,
it could be purchasing items,
it could potentially be cryptocurrency,
which is what we see a lot of recently.
There are so many different things
that we can potentially spot.
The sad truth is anyone it's actually
like what we said a second ago,
anyone can unfortunately be a victim
nowadays,
as much as like what we've said,
people can be more savvy and more aware
and we can we can try and educate people
as much as what we potentially can.
The reality is,
as things are ever changing, it's our duty
as a bank to try and provide
as much information for you,
our customers, to to basically try
and make sure that
we're giving you the opportunity
to take a step back,
realize if there is something that's
maybe not quite right.
And basically,
hopefully having that conversation
with you, maybe sometimes towards the
the sort of perception
as to whether it is real or not,
we do tend to use the term
breaking the spell.
And it's actually like
Paul mentioned a minute ago,
sometimes it is the emotional aspects
where we have to have
those difficult conversations with you.
We have to try and make sure
that obviously the situation
that you're in
is potentially not making you
sort of more susceptible to a scam
or to potentially becoming a victim.
But as I say, ultimately what my role is,
is to basically
stop those scams or prevent those payments
before they actually get released
for fraudulent purposes.
Along with that,
there is also part of my role to sort of
detect our own customers that we believe
are potentially fraudulent themselves
and basically raise a investigation
against those customers.
So ultimately
we can help protect our customers.
And those people at other banks, too, to
basically stop them from happening again.
Brilliant.
Thank you so much.
Ryan.
And again, it links perfectly
to what Paul thought was true earlier on.
We do know that fraudsters
do look to harvest people's
details using processes that are referred
to as social engineering.
And this is the act of tricking
someone into sharing information or taking
an action or, like Ryan mentioned,
just acting out of character.
But naturally, as technology evolves,
we have lots of channels
that are available for cybercriminals
to use to scam people.
That could be social media platforms,
dating applications, online marketplaces.
But I think the psychology and the tactics
are really important to understand.
As a starting point,
because scammers will prey on people
who are looking for
the best possible deals and exploit them.
They will create that sense of urgency
and try and force
people to make poor decisions.
And they will also harness
that sense of authority
to instead instill fear in their victims.
And I know this is very common
across a lot of their impersonation scams,
purchase scams that we're seeing them
at this time of year.
So we really do appreciate
that introduction and give us a bit
more context into the work
you do to educate and protect people.
But with that, we do have a few questions
that have come through that we would love
to get your thoughts on.
Now, the first one,
I think we will direct up Paul
So how do cyber criminals actually obtain
our details?
Has there been any link
made between signing up
to services and these compromisations?
And also when contacted by people
purporting to be these organizations,
how do we actually know
we're speaking to a genuine company?
I think it's interesting because again,
from a
from a data point of view
and how do they get our details now?
First of all, I have a question
and a kind of a reflection
is that if you see somebody armed
with a clipboard
in your local high street,
what do you do now?
Now, most people,
if you're anything like me,
will either do this
massive awkward semicircle
around them or that really awkward
eye contact said, no.
So I'm okay.
I'm very busy, I'm
doing something else, I'm walking
elsewhere, I'm shopping or whatever.
But actually very often
if I stop you and say, well, actually
why do you not want to talk
to this person?
There's like,
there's a number of different reasons.
You're busy, you're distracted,
you don't want to give your data
and information to this person.
You don't necessarily feel comfortable
about giving your email information
now in in person in that sort of aspect.
But the problem is over the past,
probably about 20 years, maybe,
maybe even less,
is that we've been conditioned
to give our information and personal data
away for pretty much everything.
So whether that's an online account,
whether it's an online platform,
whether that's an online form or a 10%
offer from from a website, is that data
is incredibly valuable to organizations,
both legitimate and not legitimate.
And very often it's the case of where
because we have been conditioned
as a population for so many years
to give away our information,
is that how do cybercriminals
and fraudsters obtain
the information while actually
incredibly easily so it's there's
still a situation where
whether it is through our own habits.
So if I say to you, when was the last time
you changed your personal email address
or when was the last time
you changed your personal mobile?
Now you I've just basically detailed
two of the main things
in which I contact you as a fraudster.
But if you haven't changed it
for a decade or two decades,
very often in some cases, is it?
I'm not saying change them,
but it's just that exposure over time
and also the amount of our accounts
and things like that we fill in
is it increases the amount of data
that we've ended up giving away.
So every time you fill in an online form
or an account, etcetera,
you are trusting that organization
to look after your data.
Unfortunately, some organizations
have found things like data breaches,
so data breaches have kind of exposed
that to a lot of organizations.
Data has been
then released into the public sphere,
again from a data breach point of view,
but also from a social engineering
point of view.
If I give you a 10% offer
or open an account or send you an email,
for information
that social engineering aspect is because
we've been conditioned to give it away,
we don't necessarily
have any sort of intuitive emotional
hook to say, well, who is it
that I'm giving this information to?
So very often we give it away in when when
ask to in in very limited circumstances.
So it's that aspect of both
the social engineering.
Again, the aspects around data breaches,
but also we actively put our data out
most of the time through things
like social media.
So when I used to work in law enforcement
and I still do in various guises,
but I also work for UK finance
and the dedicated card and payment crime
unit, it highlights the fact that actually
all the training in the world
that that showed me the ability
to find data, information about somebody.
Turns out you don't need any training.
It's incredibly easy and accessible.
So it's about understanding
this conscious choice of who you are
giving the data away
and when who you're engaging with it,
especially online
through its online portals and accounts.
But also how do you know
when it's a genuine company?
Well, sometimes you don't
in these sorts of situations,
it is about stopping challenging
that information and not necessarily
taking it at face value
and being able to confirm in other ways.
So whether it's a purchase company
or online will actually look for reviews
and look for these sorts of situations.
But also if it's an organization
like Barclays, you're able to then
actually,
you know what, I'm going to call you back.
I'm going to engage with you.
I'm going to use the number
that I already have
in order to contact that organization
and do so through another means.
So very often to ensure that we are
genuinely talking to the people we want to
normally takes a little bit
more action on our side, unfortunately.
Brilliant and really insightful and again,
it seems to emphasize just how busy
those cyber criminals are coming up
with a variety of different ways
to harvest personal and financial details.
So just following on from that question,
another one that's
come through in the chat is,
is there anything individuals can do
to proactively protect their data
from cyber attacks?
Well, do the kind of in-person test,
because if I came up to you in the middle
of the street with that clipboard
just out of the blue completely
and just said, can I have all of your
personal information?
Can I want
to know your name, your date of birth,
your address,
everything about you, and potentially
maybe your National insurance number
to boot as well.
Now, if I was to do that
in the middle of the street,
what would your response be?
Now in these sorts of situations
is that very often
you have this kind of defensiveness.
I'm like,
No, I'm not giving you the information.
Why would I give that information to you?
But online, we don't have face,
we don't have space,
we don't have context.
We don't have that sort of intuitive
hook of somebody randomly coming up to us.
But that's exactly what happens
in a social media direct message.
That's exactly
what happens in a social media advert.
It's exactly
what happens in a phishing email.
For instance, if I'm contacting
or if I randomly phone you.
So very often
it is the equivalent of me just running up
to you in the street with a clipboard
and asking you for that information.
So it's very often is like, Well,
do you feel comfortable
about giving this information to them?
So very often it's
that mindful process of going,
well, actually, do I trust this person?
Is this is this somebody who I can trust
in these given situations?
So that is the best advice
because unfortunately, in today's world,
asking you to never give out your data
to anyone is basic.
The equivalent of asking you
to live under a rock in a cave somewhere.
And fortunately, because if you do,
you want to buy anything or do anything,
then unfortunately
it is the nature of the beast.
But very often it is taking that moment.
Do I trust who I'm talking to.
Do I trust this message?
Do I trust this contact?
And if so, how do I confirm that trust
and how am I able to get that data away?
Yeah, absolutely brilliant.
I think that ties
into a lot of the questions
we have actually seen coming
through in the chat mentioned.
And you know, when we complete online
forms or we enter online competitions
and we're naturally asked
to put a lot of information in that
can include things like date of birth.
So I think the message there is clear
it really just take that time,
do research,
check for the organizations that you're in
that you're actually utilizing
or about your thinking of doing business
with and also getting in contact
with them through genuine channels.
But if you're unsure, the best thing to do
is probably to avoid sharing
that information
for risk of being targeted by criminals.
So that is brilliant.
So thank you so much for that. Paul.
So with that, I think
can we come over to Ryan next?
We do get a couple of questions
through that.
We think, why am I perfectly to the work
that you and your team do?
Ryan So when we have a question
that mentions that they receive
a large number of texts
that claim to be from organizations
like the Royal Mail, HMRC, etc.,
so who do we actually report these to?
So realistically
you can kind of report them to us
if you have potentially fallen victim
to one of these yourself.
So the trouble is, is
they look so realistic
and especially this time of year,
you can also report them too.
Obviously the Stop Think Fraud
at those at the top of organizations
and stuff like that
from if you're looking at it from a
from a bank perspective, like I say,
especially at this time of year,
that's so, so prevalent
because the reality is everyone's
expecting parcels this time of year.
Everyone's sort of buying
gifts and presents and whatever else
it would be for family and friends
and that type of stuff.
So there's sort of a few things to
to kind of watch out for.
So first sort of main thing would be
the reality is a lot of these ones,
especially from like the Royal Mail or DPD
or these other
sort of courier sites or company sorry,
there'll always sort of in always
be something along the lines of
you need to pay X amount for a
release fee for your parcel or something
along those lines.
The reality is you will never be asked
by these companies to pay
a small release fee.
Air Quotes “Release fee”
because if you've bought the product
from a legitimate merchant, so let's say
you bought it from Boots or John Lewis
or whoever else it would be,
they will always add the
the postage to the actual final bill.
So you should never be paying
an additional amount on top of that.
So there's a few things to sort of spot.
The first thing,
especially if you get it from a
an actual email, is check the actual
email itself.
So check the email
because nine times out of ten a guarantee,
you check the actual email where you
when you type on the actual email itself
or the name of who it's been sent from
and it will be nothing to do
with the Royal Mail
or nothing to do with HMRC or something
along those lines.
Most of the time it's actually quite funny
because it does actually
have someone's actual name.
So the scammers actual name in the email
followed by maybe a load of numbers
or digits or something.
The other thing that you can also do is
if you get it from a text or again,
if it is an email,
have a look at the grammar
and the punctuation and stuff like that.
Because sometimes what you will find
is when you're reading it,
don't randomly be sort of a double spacing
or an extra letter
or one of the words will be spelt wrong
or something like that.
Now I'm not saying go away and, and read
in detail every single one of these,
but if you look and it just doesn't look
right straight off, right off the bat then
obviously there's cause for concern
that what we would advise is
if you ever have potentially
submitted details to one of these,
like what we mentioned a minute ago,
call your bank as soon as you can,
because the reality is the faster
you get in contact with the bank
and the quicker
you let us know, the quicker
we can ultimately do something about it.
So if you've potentially contacted
or given out information to one of these
one of these sort of texts
or emails or whatever it would be,
simply call us, because it might be a case
that we may need to reissue a new card
to you or something like that,
because maybe you've given out
the long number on your card
or whatever else it would be.
But the reality is,
especially this time of year,
these are always all over the place.
And it's not just the HMRC or Royal Mail
It could be anyone.
Funnily enough, I had one from the DVLA.
I know that my car tax was coming up soon,
so there you go.
I'm looking at that straight away
thinking could it be genuine?
Like say, stop, have a look at it,
do a little bit of investigation
and it's still not entirely sure.
And like I say, there are websites out
there, even our own Barclays website,
if you did want to have a look at what
to sort of look for in order
to try and protect yourself
a little bit further.
Brilliant.
Thank you very much Ryan.
I think that actually leads perfectly
into our next question.
So legitimate calls
from financial institutions like Barclays,
for example, and those fraud teams
can sometimes seem suspicious.
Can they be linked to some sort of a code
within the Barclays
mobile banking app to clarify
that they are actually real?
Yeah, definitely.
So it's actually a really good question
because
most of us are taught
that if you ever receive a call
from from “the bank”,
then it's probably suspicious
or you've probably got cause for concern
or something like that.
That's just typically
how everyone's raised is
if we ever get something
like that, ignore it.
What we would always try and do,
at least from from a Barclays
perspective, is
we will always try and take you through
If we do potentially need
to make outbound calls yourself.
So like I say, that's what I do.
If we have a duty to contact you,
we will simply always try and take you
through security using the Barclays
Mobile Banking app.
So you don't need to give us any details.
You don't need to give us your card
details or answer security questions
or something like that.
We will always try and do that
where possible.
And it's simply a case of just sending
a notification to the app and it'll say,
you've got a call from Barclays.
You're speaking with Brian.
Is it you on the call?
And you just simply confirm
that and it allows us to continue our call
without having to actually divulge
any personal information
or like we mentioned, given
our email addresses and stuff like that.
The other thing
as well is like
what Paul mentioned earlier is
we will never, ever try and put
you under pressure to continue the call.
So if you ever receive a call
from the bank
or from someone claiming to be
from the bank, we would never turn around.
You would say, Well,
you have to continue this call.
Otherwise these funds are going to get
released or something along those lines.
You never get that.
What we would simply advise you
is if you don't feel comfortable
on the call, call us back on
a legitimately sourced number.
So the numbers
on the back of your actual debit card,
the number from the official bank website,
so from the official Barclays website
or something like that, we will never try
and force you to continue with the call
because as I mentioned at the beginning,
it's it's talk
that you
should never get a call from the bank.
Yeah, that's absolutely brilliant.
Ryan really insightful
and I think it links back a lot to what
Paul mentioned earlier on.
If we are unsure, we take that time,
we do our research and we contact
those organizations through a channel
that we absolutely know to be genuine.
And it's great
that some of those digital tools
can actually be used to help people
in those situations.
Excellent.
So I think now
we will come back over to Paul.
I've got a couple on True Paul
that I think might be brilliant
for you to share some insight on.
So we've heard a lot about remote access
on malicious software recently.
If someone gets access to your computer
and you are of course aware of it,
what steps can you take to cut them off
as quickly as possible?
So there's two parts to this.
One is that the first part is, again,
any device,
for instance, again,
if you're on a computer, for instance,
is a first of all having, say,
for instance, antivirus and firewall,
whether that's the free version
that say for instance, comes with Windows
or different platforms,
having something like that
installed on your computer,
whether it is the free version
or, again, the paid for version.
Generally speaking,
I like a paid full version
because it comes with a number
of a suite of other security
softwares, etc..
So very often it comes down to the fact
that actually having those sorts of things
in place at the time is incredibly good.
Also make sure that, for instance,
if you you're an iOS device or an Apple
device, for instance, or an iPad
or any device, always keep them updated.
So nine times out of ten,
pretty much all updates require
or are included
with some sort of security update.
So, for instance, a vulnerability
in software or a vulnerability
in the hardware, etc..
So very often keeping these things
on automatic update, for instance,
from a public point of view is really,
really good to keep that security going.
Now, again, that's great, but generally
speaking, sometimes from a remote access
software or malware, it's required on us
to be vigilant as well on top of it,
unfortunately.
So very often if I send you an email
or a text message or
or trying to get you to take an action
on a link or a website,
very often then I can download
some sort of malicious software
or indeed remote access software
directly onto my computer.
Now having the antivirus and firewall
and also updated machines
in the first place
will go a long way to to again being
you're almost your last line of defense
if you have clicked on that link.
It's also the advice that Ryan gave
you is around on trying to avoid
going onto those links in the first place.
But when it comes to it,
if you've actually got to the point
where it's now happening,
is that especially for remote access
software, very often criminals,
especially in things like investment scams
and they will
I will guide you through the process.
So if you go to this website, say,
for instance, teamviewer or a number of
different products out there as well,
they are completely legitimate platforms.
The software
you're your platform, your your antivirus
won't flag it because it's again,
legitimate software
used for things like it support
and all these sorts of things.
So they are used.
But the problem is it gives
whoever is actually kind
of directing that individual
complete access over the computer.
So very often
I will guide you through the process,
but actually in the background
I could be taking information, taking
data, downloading
something on the app on your computer,
something along those lines.
So if you do get to that point,
unfortunately,
it does come down to the fact that if you
then realize, hold on a second,
something's going on,
you don't have necessarily direct access
over your computer at that moment.
So very often
it is turning off the computer because
you want to get shut access to that person
as quickly as humanly possible.
Or it could be
if you're closer to the router, cut
the router off, etc.,
to be able to stop the connection.
If you are literally in that moment
of realization of going holding the second
somebody's done it, if you've got malware
downloaded on your platform,
it's about running a scan
with your antivirus and firewall systems.
And again
depending on the severity of the malware,
then you may need to get support
for that as well.
But generally speaking is that
I am still going back to
the C.A.U.S.E was going back
to the Context of Authority,
Urgency, Scarcity and Emotion
is that that's how I'm going to get you
to download it in the first place.
So in those moments is yes,
we've seen lot of these rises
of different malware and ransomware
and all these sorts of things.
But generally speaking,
it does come down to that emotional
mindfulness in the first place
because our intuitions
doesn't necessarily have a great deal
to go on in those moments.
So it's about stopping.
Brilliant. Thank you, Paul. And again,
very insightful and great advice
on how to protect ourselves
and become more aware of things
like suspicious links, fake websites
and of course, malicious software
and should use following of not both.
Further advice can we give to protect
vulnerable individuals from scams?
Because as we've seen already,
just in this session
alone, how much we've covered off.
But when we look at all
the different types of scams
out there, impersonation
scams, purchase scams, money, mules,
what can we do to support
maybe those different age demographics
or people who may be too trusting
of these types of contacts?
Yeah, I think first of all, it's
about realizing that
we if we are human being,
if you are a human being,
you are vulnerable to scams.
Unfortunately, is that very often
we have this kind of overconfidence
that it isn't just elderly people,
it isn't just well,
it is purely on the basis
that after probably nigh on nine years
of looking into the behavioral science
around online manipulation, online
scams, social engineering, I realized
that actually we're all susceptible.
We've all been, like I said before,
we've all been told something that we
wanted to hear at probably the wrong time.
And especially in an online environment,
we we often project our own feelings.
So for instance, in things like romance
scams, what am I really exploiting?
Well, actually I'm lonely and isolated.
I feel depressed. I can be anxious.
I can be I have a number of emotions
that are going on for me.
I might be isolated from my family
or these or situations,
but very often somebody coming
out of the blue and going, You know what?
I think you're incredible.
I want to spend my life with you.
That that can be incredibly powerful
and very often is that.
Have you ever had a friend
that has been in a relationship
that they shouldn't be in?
Have you tried to tell them?
Again,
it's an incredibly challenging situation
and that is no different
to what Ryan was talking about in relation
to what we try and do from a banking
point of view in, you know what?
This is the point
where you're transferring money.
This is the point where we believe
that this could be a scam.
And very often
people will be in that situation
where they go, I'm in love
with the person.
I'm I'm I'm involved
in an incredibly investment opportunity.
I want to buy this product.
Why should I believe otherwise?
So in these sorts of situations is it's
first of all, realizing that we are
vulnerable and human beings aren't great
at admitting that most of the time.
But this is very much the case
and that's the first real step.
But on top of that is that again,
think about the level of trust
that we can have in our information.
So whether it's an online product
or a holiday or all these sorts of things,
I only really need an image
that I could have stolen
from anywhere else on the Internet,
put it onto a marketplace or social media,
and then basically, you know, this
this much.
So very often it's the case where
actually there's very little verification
needed for that.
So very often it's having that kind
of healthy level of cynicism, realizing,
how do I go about making this trust
much stronger?
How do I that's terrible English,
but you know what I mean?
But it's again, it's about verifying.
It's trusting
and verifying in those situations.
And very often things like again,
when we are asked to give away access
to whether it's our information, our data,
but also often it's
about our bank accounts as well.
And so in recent years
we've seen a massive rise
in what's called money mules.
So individuals who have relinquished
a certain amount of control
over their bank accounts
and allow criminals
to essentially launder and funnel
the funds into those bank accounts
and utilize them for criminal purposes.
Now, some people,
some people that we arrest will have 45,
50 banking apps on their phone.
They're completely witting
in these sorts of situations.
They are a criminal in and of themselves
and they facilitate it.
But actually the grand majority of people
that are unwitting in these situations,
they're being groomed,
they're being coerced in these situations.
They may have been incentivized
with gift cards or money
or a percentage of it
to give access away from it as well.
So very often it is about can
you can't go through life without trusting
some people, but it's also about verifying
that trust in the first place.
Amazing.
Thank you so much, Paul.
And again, one really important topic
that you touched on there
was that element of money
muling in particular.
And this might be one for you, Ryan, that
you could share a bit more insight on.
If you do inadvertently facilitate money
laundering,
can you actually be prosecuted for that?
Yeah.
So it is a really good one and it comes
down exactly to what Paul just mentioned.
So it's the whole witting or unwitting
scenario.
The reality is,
at least from a banking perspective,
it all comes down to how much does
that the Money Mule in terms of let's say
it was a Barclays customer,
actually realized what they're doing
because it's actually what
we've just mentioned a lot of the time.
They don't realize
what's actually happening.
They've given someone else access
to their account in order
for maybe a quick payoff or it's with what
we said, maybe some little bit of money
left behind in the account after it's
all said and done or something like that.
The reality is if someone is
is sort of found
unwitting, ultimately what we need to do
is it's education more than I think.
So if we if we come across the situation
where we'd have to investigate
the customer, we've looked at them
and we've said, you know what,
this doesn't quite look right.
We will have a thorough,
thorough investigation into them
and we'll basically come up with
an outcome if we deem it to be unwitting,
we will still close their account.
So we will close their account
with us as a bank
because it's potentially a risk
to business.
It's a risk if a customer basically.
But the reality is more often than not,
it's more down to the education.
So it's making that customer aware
of what they've done,
that it's obviously illegal
because sometimes they don't even realize
what they're doing is actually illegal.
And and then it kind
of goes from there
if you're looking at it on the other side.
So you're looking at where we have clear
evidence that they are witting think
they are fully aware
of what they're doing.
All that type of stuff
is simply a case of close
their account down straightaway
and we ultimately upload them
onto a fraud database to basically
let the other banks know
that this person is fraudulent.
This person has been found
to a bit of possession or in the in
the process of trying to move fraudulent
funds in and out of their account.
And then basically
it has a massive knock on effect
because if you are found to be witting
and to be found as an actual mule,
you potentially are not going to be able
to get anything
like a mortgage or open up another account
or something like that.
And the reality is with a lot of these
people that are unwitting,
they do tend to be the younger customer.
And the reality is when they kind of get
recruited into these type of situations,
they don't realize what the repercussions
are of them actually being part of this.
So that's why the education of
this is so important
in making them aware
of what does actually happen,
what is the process
and what can ultimately be the outcome.
If they do carry on doing this,
it can have such a such a big impact
on them later on in life.
Really?
Ryan, I think I think that really links
back to everything
that we have mentioned in that session
today.
It's all about the education
piece building and expanding our knowledge
because that's going to better equipped
us to be able to identify and of course
avoid falling victim
to these types of fraud and scams.
So that is absolutely brilliant
that we have a lot of different questions
coming in around things like
cryptocurrency and social media platforms.
So I think one I'd love to get some more
insight from your self on Ryan, would be
I get a lot of messages on social media
to invest in cryptocurrencies.
So do we get many reports of people
being scammed in that way?
Yeah, absolutely.
So when we talk about trends and stuff
that sort of occurs more often than not
and that type of stuff,
cryptocurrency at the minute is
one of the biggest ones that we're seeing.
The reality is, is cryptocurrency
in the grand scheme of things,
is actually still very, very new.
So yes, it's
been around close to a decade,
but if you're looking at it
from its popularity,
I guess if you're looking at it from
that perspective, it's very, very new.
And the reality is a lot of people
don't know the full ins and outs, myself
included.
I know enough from my role,
but if you were to turn around to me
tomorrow and say, What about X, Y, Z,
what should I be investing in?
I'm no expert in that.
But what we do see is a lot of crypto
scams that are coming in
and also it's how to spot them.
So what I mentioned
kind of at the beginning of this is
most often than not what we see
with cryptocurrency
scams is where a customer is being given
almost something.
And it's a phrase that we use a lot is,
is it too good to be true?
So we probably hear that a lot in life
and sometimes it can come across
as a bit of a negative thing.
But the reality is
if you're being promised
a return on your investment, that is,
they're saying they're going to triple,
quadruple, whatever it would be
your investment in a matter of days.
The reality is that is not the case
with a cryptocurrency investment.
What we are finding,
what we've come across recently is
you'll be asked
or contacted through social media.
So you might see an advertisement
through it, through, let's
say, Instagram, for instance.
You contact them and then you'll actually
get a call from the scammer saying,
Send money to this account
or open up your account
and this cryptocurrency platform
or whatever it would be.
And then basically they'll get you
to deposit a small amount of money.
So this could be anything from £10,
£20, £30, whatever it would be.
And what they would do
is they will transfer you back,
say 60, 70, £80 or something like that.
So from the consumer's perspective,
you'll be looking at that thinking,
my God,
I've just made a double on my investment
in a matter of days
or something like that.
That's how they'll get you.
And then basically they'll say, Right now,
put in more and you might put in 200
or 300, 400, a thousand,
whatever it would be,
and that's when they will take that money.
Another thing that we do see
is when it comes to that point as well,
you start getting contacted by these
these quote unquote,
financial advisers who have basically been
helping you make this payment
and now
basically say you need to send them
a fee in order to get your return
on your investment or something like that.
This is a common trick that's that's used
especially in the investment world
or the investment scams world
from what I see personally.
So it's definitely something
to keep an eye out,
especially, especially,
like I said, when you're getting it in
for the first time,
one of the things that we do
typically say to our customers
is how much research
have you actually done into this?
What you, the one has actively
sought the investment,
or if you've been contacted by someone
about the investment,
Because if he's getting told
that someone's contacted
you about the investment, that is what we
what we would claim is a red flag.
Brilliant.
Thank you very much, Ryan.
So again,
I think the key thing to remember
not only with cryptocurrencies
but what any type of investment will be,
definitely need to do that research
to seek independent financial advice
before investing any money
because those investments
can obviously decrease
as well as increase them.
When you add in that extra element of
is this potentially a scam
doing those checks and making sure
the companies are actually regulated
to provide those products is such
an important topic and a step to take.
And just before we go on
to our last couple of questions
Paul,
I just want to come back over to yourself
to see if you have anything
that you'd like to add
in on those investment
and cryptocurrency scams.
Yeah, of course, because I think
especially a cryptocurrency investment
scam is that they work
very much in the same way
as any other investment scams.
So we've seen things like fine wine
scams, we've seen whiskey barrel scams,
we've seen gold bullion scams, we've seen
basically in asset class here,
basically in relation to investments,
depending
on what's going on in the economy,
depending on
what's going on in the media, in the news,
generally speaking, they're incredibly
good at making it contextually relevant
to what's going on in the world,
and especially with crypto over the last 2
to 3 years.
It's kind of shot up in that kind
of saturation in the environment as well.
But from a criminal side, this is again
from Ryan was talking about in relation
to that impact and that people don't
necessarily know the mechanics behind it,
but also I'm reliant on that as a criminal
because you know what actually,
although the grand majority of crypto is
is very much legitimate, there's different
working processes for it.
The different applications
I train a lot of the banks
and law enforcement in crypto,
but generally speaking, it
reduces the need,
the ability for me to be found.
So generally speaking, if I've invested
and I put a load into crypto from a from a
from fraud point of view,
from a criminal gains point of view,
it's it's a little harder
to investigate to
and to be able to identify.
So very often in these situations
is that I'm relying on
cryptocurrency has a both
a brilliant fantastic thing that
the victim doesn't know what's going on
and they don't know the mechanics
and they don't
necessarily
have the avenues to do that research.
But actually on the other side
is it means that I can actually launder
my money
in a much more effective fashion on crypto
because if you transfer money to the wrong
a bank account,
you have an institution to be able to help
you get your money back.
Crypto, once it's gone, it's gone.
It's there's
there's no there's no repercussions.
There's no overarching organization
that can say, you know what,
we will get your crypto back.
No, that's not how it works.
Unfortunately.
Brilliant.
Thank you so much, Paul.
Again,
I think that's that's just so important.
The key thing to remember
there is if those deals or offers
sell good to be true, they probably are.
And that is often going to make victims
less inclined to properly question
their own decisions as they may be focused
on, you know, getting that product
or service for the best possible deal
or growing their assets when investing.
So again, just a really kind of solid
message from us all would be
that when considering taking out any types
of financial products or services,
always do seek that independent
financial advice prior to doing so.
So I think a
theme that we it off
today, guys, was purchase scams.
And naturally with this time of year it's
absolutely applicable.
So just before we closed off
all of the session and share
some resources with our audience,
I suppose kind of I'd
just like to recap any of those key points
that you would like to share
with how we actually avoid falling
to purchase scams.
And we'll also see if we can
and we can get one
or two more questions in there
then as well.
So I think from a purchase scam
point of view,
going back to what I've said before,
is how little amount of information
do I need to convince you
that I have a product to sell.
So if I'm a seller, for instance,
so whether that be on a social media
marketplace, whether that be on Instagram
or social media
or it's an email or it's a website,
is that there's very little verification
that I have in my possession.
The product for me to sell to you.
Now, we've seen rises in holiday scams.
We've seen a rise in things
like rental fraud in the last year,
especially with kind of high rental prices
and prices and competition.
All of these sorts of things contribute
it and purchase scams kind of covers
a lot of these different multitudes
of of methods in order to do so.
So very often in these sorts of purchase
scams is again, it's taking that aspect.
So for instance, I can go on to a website
or I can go to a seller.
Well, actually,
if I go to a different website
that's not necessarily regulated or is not
necessarily got like those security
in those processes, it's
about making sure that you read reviews,
absolutely read reviews
around a potential brand,
a potential product
or a potential seller, for instance,
in these given situations to, again,
get the measure of support
potentially, some people have been victim
victimized a bit before.
So I think all these given situations,
how do I trust that that product exists?
And unfortunately very often
in today's world, it's it's very difficult
to do sometimes, but very often it's
also checking your emotion.
Very often we're excited
when we've seen those deals,
and very often when we talk about it,
it's too good to be true.
Well, actually, very often
we don't in an emotional state,
we don't do
what is good in those situations.
So doing that, trusting and verifying,
taking those processes,
reading reviews, making sure that you try,
try and make sure
that you kind of concentrate
on more of the beaten track
in relation to online websites
and and trusted websites as well.
Very often is the case
because there's nothing,
no regulation stopping me
from creating any other website, etc.
and to try and sell you something that
doesn't even exist in the first place.
So that's what my advice is.
It's brilliant.
That's absolutely excellent.
Paul And then I think we definitely
have time for one more question,
and you will both have to forgive me
because I'm going to open this one up
the both here and I am kind of asking you
to predict the future a little bit here.
And but as technology advances,
what do we predict
the next big scam is going to be?
Or what are we doing as organizations
to raise awareness
about new types of fraud and scams?
Yeah, so one thing,
at least from our perspective,
we've already kind of looked at
or we're already aware of,
and we've got sort of measures starting
to be developed and stuff like that is,
as I'm sure everyone has probably heard
recently, is the impact of AI,
deepfakes, voice, biometrics,
that type of stuff.
So it's very much it's becoming.
So when we spoke at the very,
very beginning of the call
about the digitization of fraud and scams
and stuff like that, that's developing,
that's the reality of AI,
probably what's going to be happening next
and and what's AI is potentially going
to bring to that aspect.
And like we said,
and unfortunately fraudsters and stuff
like that, they're developing.
So at least from our perspective,
that's probably what's going to be
coming around the corner.
But as I say, there is stuff
behind the scenes in our in our voice
and in our stuff that's that's being
developed within our our cybercrime team.
Basically.
And I think
on top of that is it's
like I've said, around the limited level
level of verification
that I need to convince you I am who I say I am
or a product or a holiday or anything
like that or an investment opportunity.
Unfortunately, things like AI Deepfake
does kind of almost reduce
that level of trust that we can have
in the content in which we can see.
So very often is the case
where we are vulnerable to fraud and scams
in the same way that we are vulnerable
to disinformation, misinformation,
online grooming, online dating, coercion,
everything comes down to it
because have you ever taken a text message
the wrong way from a partner?
Have you ever taken an email
the wrong way from a colleague
or all these sorts of things
is because our emotional relationship
with our technology
in these seamless, subjective forms,
very often it takes takes real presidents
and importantly things
like with AI and Deepfake, it again
reinforces things like the context
and authority and urgency,
making it much more believable,
maybe making the language a lot more
convincing in these sorts of situations.
But again, regardless of any of these
different changes in the future,
it's going to be your emotion
that is triggered,
it is going to be your emotions.
And then unfortunately for me,
from a psychology
point of view that's going to move
a lot slower than anything else.
So asking you to have those moments,
regardless of what you're reading,
what you're seeing, what you're exposed
to, having that emotional moment to go,
is this something I can trust, stop,
challenge and protect in those moments?
Fantastic.
Thank you both so much for our time
for that insight and of course, for giving
up your time to join the event today
and sharing your expertise with us all.
And of course, thank you to our audience
who have joined us for the session today.
And I know I speak for us all.
When I said we could have kept you here
all day talking about these topics.
And that is just because
there are so many different channels,
so many different tactics
that those cyber criminals do use.
And as we've seen throughout the session,
there's lots of different ways
that they will target us.
But the best way of protecting ourselves
is to continue to expand
our knowledge on the tactics
that they use.
And thankfully,
there are lots of brilliant resources
available that can support those
on our learning journeys.
The first of which
we're going to talk about
today
is the Take Five to Stop Fraud website,
which Paul has mentioned
throughout the session today.
So Take Five is an initiative
led by UK Finance
and backed by the UK Government
and other organizations, and it's designed
to help you expand your knowledge
on how we will be targeted by criminals.
So if you do receive a phone
call, text message or email
that you think may be fake,
it ordered you to stop,
take five and challenge
what you are being told.
As we've seen today, criminals are experts
at impersonating people, organizations
and of course the police.
And they will spend hours
researching us for their scams.
So they will be hoping
that we let our guard down
just for that brief moment, that that's
where they will see their biggest success.
So as Paul mentioned, stop and think
it could protect you and your money.
And remember, only criminals
will ever try and rush you or panic
you and to making those quick decisions.
And we also have a lot of information
available through the fraud
and Scams
section of our Barclays.co.uk website.
This contains lots of information
which includes tips to help us identify
when we're being targeted
and how to keep ourselves safe online.
This includes resources like phone
number, checkers and a jargon buster.
To help you understand
different words and phrases
we use when talking about fraud and scams.
But we also run regular online
events to help people
learn about fraud and scams.
And part of
this is also making our events available
through the Barclays.co.uk website.
Now, I did see we had a lot of questions
come through today
about these forwarder events.
So through this platform you'll be able
to access our impersonation scams event
where we had our guest speakers
to provide insight into the latest trends.
And we also have
our impersonation scams event
which can give you tips on
how to protect yourself when targeted by
someone claiming to be a friend
or family member,
an organization that you have dealings
with, or of course, the police.
Now, another
point on the Money Mules event
that we ran back in September.
If you've ever wondered how criminals move
stolen money around, money, mules,
as we heard today, is one of the ways
in which they do that.
And this often involves them
approaching young people
on social media platforms
to help them do this.
So through that event will explain
what money
mules actually are
and how to spot those warning signs.
All of this and much more is accessible
through our Barclays.co.uk web platform.
And then finally,
we have our free interactive learning
platform, Digital Wings.
This platform is designed to help you
boost your digital skills and confidence
around a variety of different topics,
including staying safe online
through our Online Safety Hub
we have lots of information,
including bite sized learning modules,
internal resources and links
to external organizations
who can support us
all in expanding our knowledge
on this important topic,
which is going to be applicable
to each and every one of us.
Because of course, what we've learned
today is scammers do not discriminate.
They will target any of us at any time.
And we also
have a lot of information through that
safety board on how to report suspicious
emails, text messages and phone calls
through the relevant channels.
But we also have a link in that safety
call to the National Cyber
Security Center Cyber Aware Action Plan.
If you've not heard of this resource,
it supports individuals and organizations.
By having them answer
a couple of questions on topics
like passwords and two step verification,
after which they'll be provided
with a free, personalized list of actions
to help improve their cybersecurity,
which, as we saw, aligns
a lot to point fake
emails or suspicious links
about malicious software.
We talked about today.
So just to close off the session,
it's important
to remember that
anyone can be tricked by a scammer.
They will change their tactics
often and adapt quickly to changes
in the economic climate.
And we're constantly uncovering new scams.
And the best way for us to continue
to protect ourselves
and the people around us
is by expanding our knowledge
on these subjects
and sharing that within our networks
so that everyone
we do hope you've enjoyed the event today.
We will be sending out a short feedback
survey off the back of the event
today where you can share
your thoughts on the events.
You know, we did have so many questions
come through today.
Unfortunately,
we didn't get to answer them all.
But we will be looking at planning our
next upskill event in order to of 2024.
And we will use all of the insight
you've raised in the meeting today
to shape those topics.
But if you do have anything in particular
you'd like to see for the future,
please do let us know through that
feedback survey.
Any thoughts that you think we could
implement to make these events better?
We will take each of those comments
and use them to shape our future
digital safety events.
Also, if you really enjoyed the event,
the topics were relevant, it's
giving you a lot of insight that you can
now share within your network.
Those nine and tens are just as important
because they reassure us all
that we're doing the right things for you
and our future.
Attendees.
But with that, everyone
have a wonderful day and we look forward
to seeing you on another
one of our upskill events very, very soon.